[docs] Leader Election Guide Updates (#5654)
hashicorp/consul: website/source/docs/guides/leader-election.html.md

  This guide describes how to build client-side leader election using Consul. If you are interested in the leader election used internally to Consul, please refer to the consensus protocol documentation instead.
---

# Application Leader Election with Sessions

For some applications, like HDFS, it is necessary to set one instance as
a leader. This ensures the application data is current and stable.

This guide describes how to build client-side leader elections for service 
instances, using Consul. Consul's support for
[sessions](/docs/internals/sessions.html) allows you to build a system that can gracefully handle failures.

If you
are interested in the leader election used internally by Consul, please refer to the
[consensus protocol](/docs/internals/consensus.html) documentation instead.

## Contending Service Instances 

Imagine you have a set of service instances who are attempting to acquire leadership
for a given service. All service instances that are participating should agree on a given
key to coordinate. A good pattern is simply:

```text
service/<service name>/leader
```

Let's abbreviate this pattern as simply as a `<key>` for the rest of this guide.

```text

> service/dbservice/leader = lead

Reviewer: I got a bit lost here when following along. I think this assignment could benefit from being called out a bit more explicitly in words. As in, clarifying that the guide will use `lead` as `<key>`.

Also, a slightly less generic key like `db-lead` might be a clearer abbreviation for when that key pops up later in the guide.

Author: I actually think we could remove this not all together. I think this is more confusing than just using the full key `service/dbservice/leader`, especially since the full key really isn't too long.

Reviewer: True, that sounds good to me.

Author: I think we've resolved this confusion

```

### Create a Session 

The first step is to create a session using the
[Session HTTP API](/api/session.html#session_create).

```sh
$ curl  -X PUT -d '{"Name": "dbservice"}' http://localhost:8500/v1/session/create
```

This will return a JSON object containing the session ID:

```json
{
  "ID": "4ca8e74b-6350-7587-addf-a18084928f3c"
}
```

### Acquire a Session 

The next step is to acquire a session for a given key from this instance
using the PUT method on a [KV entry](/api/kv.html) with the
`?acquire=<session>` query parameter. 

The `<body>` of the PUT should be a
JSON object representing the local instance. This value is opaque to
Consul, but it should contain whatever information clients require to
communicate with your application (e.g., it could be a JSON object
that contains the node's name and the application's port).

```sh

> $ curl -X PUT -d <body> http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/lead?acquire=ca8e74b-6350-7587-addf-a18084928f3c

Reviewer: There's a copy-paste error here, the session_id is missing the leading 4.

Author: Good catch!

> $ curl -X PUT -d <body> http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/lead?acquire=ca8e74b-6350-7587-addf-a18084928f3c

Author: ```suggestion
$ curl -X PUT -d <body> http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/lead?acquire=4ca8e74b-6350-7587-addf-a18084928f3c
```

 ```

This will either return `true` or `false`. If `true`, the lock has been acquired and

> the local service instance is now the leader. If `false` is returned, some other node has acquired

Reviewer: The reference to "node" here could be removed in favor of "service" for consistency:

> If `true`, the lock has been acquired and the local node is now the leader. If `false` is returned, some other instance has acquired the lock.

Reviewer: Fixed a typo in my suggestion ^

on key `dbservice`. This is because the lock may be released or the instance could fail, etc.

The leader must also watch for changes since its lock may be released by an operator
or automatically released due to a false positive in the failure detector.

By default, the session makes use of only the gossip failure detector. That
is, the session is considered held by a node as long as the default Serf health check
has not declared the node unhealthy. Additional checks can be specified if desired.

Watching for changes is done via a blocking query against `<key>`. If they ever
notice that the `Session` of the `<key>` is blank, there is no leader, and then should
retry lock acquisition. Each attempt to acquire the key should be separated by a timed
wait. This is because Consul may be enforcing a [`lock-delay`](/docs/internals/sessions.html).

### Release the Session

If the leader ever wishes to step down voluntarily, this should be done by simply
releasing the lock:

```sh
$ curl -X PUT http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/dbservice?release=4ca8e74b-6350-7587-addf-a18084928f3c
```

## Discover the Leader

> Another common practice regarding leader election is for non-leader instances may wish to identify the leader for the given set of service instances.

Reviewer: This is a bit odd to read. Maybe it should be something like:
> Another common practice regarding leader election is that non-leader instances may wish to identify the leader for the given set of service instances.

Author: I've completely re-worked this opening.

### Watch the Session 

All instances now remain in an idle waiting state. In this state, they watch for changes

> on "mysql" key. This is because the lock may be released or the instance could fail, etc.

Reviewer: Do you think it could cause confusion to call the key "mysql" here? Since it's `service/mysql/leader`.

> on "mysql" key. This is because the lock may be released or the instance could fail, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the key `service/mysql/leader`. This is because the lock may be released or the instance could fail, etc.
```

Author: Yes, I do think so.

is, the session is considered held by a node as long as the default Serf health check
has not declared the node unhealthy. Additional checks can be specified if desired.

Watching for changes is done via a blocking query against the key. If they ever

> notice that the `Session` of "mysql" is blank, there is no leader, and then should

Reviewer: Same as above.

> notice that the `Session` of "mysql" is blank, there is no leader, and then should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notice that the `Session` field in the response is blank, there is no leader, and then should
```
